roasted vegetable soup

Growing up I despised soup. Soup was, to me, “food” eaten as a last resort when there was no other food available. It was just liquid with stuff floating in it, I thought. Hardly the substance meant to sustain a young, healthy, virile lad such as myself.

Oh how things change.

(I still feel this way about 99% of pre-made soups readily available in cans and pouches, mind you. Folderol, the lot of them.)

Homemade soup is an art, an act of creation to be treasured above all things, in much the same way one finally hangs that framed picture just so or manages to cook an entire meal without burning oneself (note: the quality of meal is directly proportional to the injuries obtained during the preparation thereof and don’t let anyone tell you differently).

In order to make this soup you will require vegetables. Lots and lots of vegetables. Most of the mix of vegetables are up to your own personal tastes and proclivities. A good portion of these should fall into the “sturdy root” category, however: carrots, parsnips, potatoes, celeriac, and turnips are all ideal candidates here. Other additions here can be peas, corn, beets (these tend to make everything taste like beet so go easy), asparagus, bell or heirloom pepper, zucchini, eggplant.

The following aromatics, however, must be a part of your arsenal or you will have failed before you’ve even begun: yellow onion, red onion, leeks, garlic. Two handfuls of fresh spinach. Spring onions wouldn’t hurt. A diced chili or two if you want heat. You will also need 4-5 large roma tomatoes. These are not optional.

Those concerned with order and cleanliness may wish to prepare all of their vegetables before cooking. Others may dovetail and chop as they go along. As long as you’ve got a nice glass of wine or bottle of stout on the go throughout the process either way is fine. When chopping your vegetables there are two utmost priorities to keep in mind: 1) as with all roasting recipes uniformity is key – you want your vegetables to cook evenly, and 2) keep your aromatics separate, as you will see. Aromatics can be chopped finer than the other vegetables. Your tomatoes will only be sliced in half, they need no further chopping.

Right, to the roasting. This will, oddly, start on the stovetop before moving to the oven. To begin, preheat your oven to 400ºF/200ºC. Onto your stovetop will go your largest roasting tray (depending on the layout of your stove you may need two burners here) and a large glug of olive oil – one of the easiest ways to screw up roasting is to not use enough fat. After the oil gets nice and hot the first step will be to throw in the aromatics with a good seasoning of salt and pepper and sautée until they begin to soften and take on colour. As you reach this state, add the spinach leaves on top. While the pan will look far too crowded the spinach will wilt down to almost nothing in a few moments as the water evaporates from it.

When you judge the spinach to have shrunk down as far as it’s going to go, it’s time to add all of your vegetables except for the tomatoes – those go in last. Add your vegetable mix to the aromatics and toss to evenly coat with oil – adding more oil to ensure even coating at this stage is perfectly fine. When your vegetables and aromatics are evenly distributed, season with more salt, pepper, and other dried herbs of your choice (rosemary, sage, etc.). Now, this is important: you want to evenly distribute your tomato halves face up on top of everything else (as per the picture up top). When laid out, salt each tomato and drizzle each one individually with oil, making sure the entire top surfaces are covered. Lay in a few splashes of aged balsamic vinegar and – perhaps counterintuitively – sprinkle a heaping teaspoon of sugar over the whole mess. This is just the way it is, yours is not to question why.

Transfer the roasting pan to the oven where it will blurble away and do its’ thing for the next 30 minutes or so. The key to this part of the process, and why the tomatoes were laid on top, is that so they roast instead of stew because stewed tomatoes are, charitably, satan’s own crotchspawn. The sugar added in the previous step will aid in the surface caramelisation of the tomatoes, adding extra depth, colour, and flavour. After 30 minutes has expired, use a fork or paring knife to test a larger chunk of a harder vegetable (carrots are a good choice here) – you want them to have softened up enough that your knife meets little resistance sliding all the way through. If there is still firmness present continue to be patient. When you judge your vegetables to be done, turn on the broiler and finish for 5 minutes to brown the tops of the vegetable mixture. Your tomatoes should be falling apart by this stage.

Back out of the oven and onto the stovetop. Run a spoon through the tomatoes to finish breaking them apart and give the mix a good stirring. In with the stock (vegetable or chicken depending on your own meat-eating proclivities), amounts are based on how thick you like your finished soup. Go easy and experiment, you can always add more later if it seems too thick but it’s a lot more difficult to go the other way.

Bring to a boil and let simmer for 10 minutes or so, stirring often. This is a good time to check for seasoning. Now, you have a few options for finishing. You can keep your soup chunky and rustic by giving it a go with a potato masher or fork for a rough, hearty feel or you can take a stick blender and turn it into pablum. I tend to go for somewhere in the middle, bashing it with a wire masher for a bit and then giving it a quick blitz to liquify it slightly while still keeping texture.

Finish with a free pour of heavy cream and – it goes without saying – an assload of butter.

The vegan-inclined among us may have wished to ignore the previous sentence.

One final check for salt and it’s off to the table. Scoop into warmed bowls and serve with bread. Red wine goes nicely.