slow cooker boozy beef stew

Take some cubes of raw stewing beef or whatever meat you feel like cooking. Put it in a bowl. Pour in an entire bottle of red wine. Chop up an onion or two, a couple or three cloves of garlic, and chiffonade a handful of fresh basil. Stir well. Salt and pepper. Cover with a lid or cling wrap or whatever, put in fridge overnight.

Next morning, get up for work a half hour or so earlier than normal. Take the bowl out of the fridge and separate the meat from the liquid and the rest of the solids. Yes, use your damn hands, it’s fine (just make sure you washed them first… or not. I’m probably never eating in your house, so whatever).

Get a frying pan nice and screaming hot on your stovetop, with a thin layer of olive oil or some other kind of fat. You want the oil just below the smoke point. In small (small!) batches brown the meat on all sides. You’re not looking to cook it all the way through, just sear some colour on the outside. As we all know, browning meat is where the flavour comes from. Note: you will make a colossal mess doing this. It’s OK. Let it be. You can clean it up later. Or don’t.

Brown the meat (small batches is important because if there’s no space between the meat pieces the sugars will boil away rather than caramelise). As you finish a batch, scoop them up and toss them in the crock pot with the remainder of the marinade (you didn’t dump that away, did you? If you did, get of the kitchen forever).

Add some more liquid to the crock pot to make sure the meat is well-covered. This can be water if you’re boring, a can of Guinness if you’re awesome, or whatever else you have on hand – stock or more wine are good options. You want the meat WELL-covered. You can’t have too much liquid here, so don’t worry about going overboard. You’ll see why later.

Add in a load of other chopped up vegetables: mushrooms, carrots, celery, potatoes, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, peppers, whatever. If you’re adventurous and/or doing this on a weekend you can roast/char them over a gas flame or in a really hot oven first. Also season – you can’t go wrong with oregano, more basil, thyme, marjoram, rosemary, garlic, celery seed, etc. Also bay leaves. Three. No more, no less. A splodge of tomato paste for colour and acidity isn’t a bad idea and I certainly wouldn’t judge you for including one.

Turn that sucker on low and put the lid on. LEAVE the lid on. Do not under any circumstance under pain of death remove the lid. Wipe down the aerated layer of fat from the top of your stove and go continue getting ready for work.

— 8 HOURS LATER —

You might need help for this step. You’ll need a big-ass pot and some kind of colander/straining device. What you’re going to do is take your crock pot out of the base and strain everything through that colander. You want every single precious drop of liquid out of the crock pot collected in your other big-ass pot. Leave the solids somewhere to cool and mature – what you’ll do next is put the pot of liquid on your stove. If you have a large crock pot it’s going to be hot and heavy (that’s what she said) so an extra pair of hands with oven mitts comes in VERY handy here.

Turn the heat up to medium-high and let it start boiling. Stir fairly regularly and let that sucker reduce by half. Yes, by half. While this is going on, go to your liquor cabinet and take down a bottle of whiskey, a bottle of vodka, and three shot glasses. Pour one shot glass of each, and then a third glass of one of your choice. The first two glasses (one of each) go into the sauce while it’s reducing. The third goes down your neck. The vodka and whiskey in the sauce will add some extra body and kick. If you’ve been keeping score at home, that’s now likely 4 types of booze in your beef stew. Yes, that’s a good thing.

Once your sauce has reduced, reincorporate it with the solids and let it all warm back up again. Check for seasoning, more salt is likely needed at this point. Serve in pasta bowls with thick slices of french bread slathered in unsalted butter (for dipping, natch). Can be eaten as-is, also works well served over mashed potatoes (which, as we all know, should be comprised mainly of cream cheese and butter held together with a little bit of potato). Red wine goes nicely. A light green salad served in side bowls wouldn’t go amiss either.

Happy eating.

—

Two footnotes:

Reducing the liquid. If someone tells you that you can mix a slurry of flour or cornstarch and water to mix in for thickening, that person is EVIL and must be RITUALLY DISEMBOWELED and probably never invited over for dinner ever again. If you’re going to use a thickening agent you make a roux of browned butter or you don’t use a thickening agent. End of.
Slathering your bread with unsalted butter. Salted butter is also acceptable, though if you’re serious about dipping bread into your stew the salt in the butter will overpower the awesome stew flavour. Still, dealer’s choice. Margarine, however, if you put that on your bread then stop reading my recipes.